Chief Justice Roberts, President Carter, President Clinton, President Bush, President Obama, fellow Americans, and people of the world: thank you.
We, the citizens of America, are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and to restore its promise for all of our people.
Together, we will determine the course of America and the world for years to come.
We will face challenges. We will confront hardships. But we will get the job done.
Every four years, we gather on these steps to carry out the orderly and peaceful transfer of power, and we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for their gracious aid throughout this transition. They have been magnificent.
Today’s ceremony, however, has very special meaning. Because today we are not merely transferring power from one Administration to another, or from one party to another – but we are transferring power from Washington, D.C. and giving it back to you, the American People.
For too long, a small group in our nation’s Capital has reaped the rewards of government while the people have borne the cost.
Washington flourished – but the people did not share in its wealth.
Politicians prospered – but the jobs left, and the factories closed.
The establishment protected itself, but not the citizens of our country.
Their victories have not been your victories; their triumphs have not been your triumphs; and while they celebrated in our nation’s Capital, there was little to celebrate for struggling families all across our land.
That all changes – starting right here, and right now, because this moment is your moment: it belongs to you.
It belongs to everyone gathered here today and everyone watching all across America. 
This is your day. This is your celebration.
And this, the United States of America, is your country.
What truly matters is not which party controls our government, but whether our government is controlled by the people.
January 20th 2017, will be remembered as the day the people became the rulers of this nation again. 
The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer.
Everyone is listening to you now.
You came by the tens of millions to become part of a historic movement the likes of which the world has never seen before.
At the center of this movement is a crucial conviction: that a nation exists to serve its citizens.
Americans want great schools for their children, safe neighborhoods for their families, and good jobs for themselves.
These are the just and reasonable demands of a righteous public.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of knowledge; and the crime and gangs and drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
This American carnage stops right here and stops right now.
We are one nation – and their pain is our pain.  Their dreams are our dreams; and their success will be our success.  We share one heart, one home, and one glorious destiny.
The oath of office I take today is an oath of allegiance to all Americans.
For many decades, we’ve enriched foreign industry at the expense of American industry;
Subsidized the armies of other countries while allowing for the very sad depletion of our military;
We've defended other nation’s borders while refusing to defend our own;
And spent trillions of dollars overseas while America's infrastructure has fallen into disrepair and decay.
We’ve made other countries rich while the wealth, strength, and confidence of our country has disappeared over the horizon.
One by one, the factories shuttered and left our shores, with not even a thought about the millions upon millions of American workers left behind.
The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed across the entire world.
But that is the past. And now we are looking only to the future.
We assembled here today are issuing a new decree to be heard in every city, in every foreign capital, and in every hall of power.
From this day forward, a new vision will govern our land.
From this moment on, it’s going to be America First.
Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs, will be made to benefit American workers and American families.
We must protect our borders from the ravages of other countries making our products, stealing our companies, and destroying our jobs.  Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength.
I will fight for you with every breath in my body – and I will never, ever let you down.
America will start winning again, winning like never before.
We will bring back our jobs. We will bring back our borders.  We will bring back our wealth.  And we will bring back our dreams.
We will build new roads, and highways, and bridges, and airports, and tunnels, and railways all across our wonderful nation.
We will get our people off of welfare and back to work – rebuilding our country with American hands and American labor.
We will follow two simple rules: Buy American and Hire American.
We will seek friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world – but we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first.
We do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone, but rather to let it shine as an example for everyone to follow.
We will reinforce old alliances and form new ones – and unite the civilized world against Radical Islamic Terrorism, which we will eradicate completely from the face of the Earth.
At the bedrock of our politics will be a total allegiance to the United States of America, and through our loyalty to our country, we will rediscover our loyalty to each other.
When you open your heart to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice.
The Bible tells us, “how good and pleasant it is when God’s people live together in unity.”
We must speak our minds openly, debate our disagreements honestly, but always pursue solidarity.
When America is united, America is totally unstoppable.
There should be no fear – we are protected, and we will always be protected.
We will be protected by the great men and women of our military and law enforcement and, most importantly, we are protected by God.
Finally, we must think big and dream even bigger.
In America, we understand that a nation is only living as long as it is striving.
We will no longer accept politicians who are all talk and no action – constantly complaining but never doing anything about it.
The time for empty talk is over.
Now arrives the hour of action.
Do not let anyone tell you it cannot be done.  No challenge can match the heart and fight and spirit of America.
We will not fail. Our country will thrive and prosper again.
We stand at the birth of a new millennium, ready to unlock the mysteries of space, to free the Earth from the miseries of disease, and to harness the energies, industries and technologies of tomorrow.
A new national pride will stir our souls, lift our sights, and heal our divisions.
It is time to remember that old wisdom our soldiers will never forget: that whether we are black or brown or white, we all bleed the same red blood of patriots, we all enjoy the same glorious freedoms, and we all salute the same great American Flag.
And whether a child is born in the urban sprawl of Detroit or the windswept plains of Nebraska, they look up at the same night sky, they fill their heart with the same dreams, and they are infused with the breath of life by the same almighty Creator.
So to all Americans, in every city near and far, small and large, from mountain to mountain, and from ocean to ocean, hear these words:
You will never be ignored again.
Your voice, your hopes, and your dreams, will define our American destiny. And your courage and goodness and love will forever guide us along the way.
Together, We Will Make America Strong Again.
We Will Make America Wealthy Again.
We Will Make America Proud Again.
We Will Make America Safe Again.
And, Yes, Together, We Will Make America Great Again. Thank you, God Bless You, And God Bless America.
My fellow Americans,
Next week, the Senate is going to vote on legislation to save Americans from the Obamacare disaster.
Obamacare has wreaked havoc on American lives, and if we don’t replace it, the calamity will only get worse – and I mean, get worse by a lot.
Here is just one story, representative of so many others.
Carrie Couey and her husband are cattle ranchers.
They have six children and the youngest is autistic.
Her family’s rates under Obamacare skyrocketed, eventually costing the Coueys three times more than their previous plan.
They were dropped from health insurance four times under Obamacare.
When I met with Carrie in March, she told us that her family couldn’t afford the equipment they needed to do the jobs while paying these crushing health insurance premiums.
Americans like Carrie and her family desperately need relief from this terrible, terrible law.
The Democrat politicians who passed Obamacare made many big promises – but they turned out to be lies – absolute, total lies.
They promised Obamacare would reduce premiums by $2,500 dollars.
Instead, premiums have skyrocketed by numbers that nobody can even believe – sometimes, many many thousands of dollars.
They promised that if you liked your plan, you could keep your plan – instead, millions of American families saw their plans cancelled.
They promised Obamacare would offer better options for American families, but in the past two years, half the insurance companies have pulled out and left the individual market – and today, Americans in one-third of all counties have only one insurer to choose from on the exchanges, and they probably, will shortly have no insurers at all.
The Senate health care bill stops the Obamacare disaster, expands choice, and drives down costs – and I want to tell you the Republican Senators are working very hard to get something that’s going to be really, really good – the opposite of the big lie which was Obamacare.
The bill will reduce premiums by 30 percent or more by 2020.
It allows states the freedom to escape even more of Obamacare’s rules and create innovative health care solutions for their citizens. In other words, we’ll be taking something away from the federal government and getting it back to the states, who can better provide and who know better what to do.
It provides generous funding for people with expensive health conditions, which will lower premiums in the individual market.
The bill doubles the amount that Americans can contribute to tax-free Health Savings Accounts and allows you to use those accounts to pay your premiums.
This plan provides states with the much-needed flexibility to better manage their Medicaid programs. It maintains Medicaid coverage for every single elderly American, disabled American, and American child who is currently on the program.
It also expands the opportunity for people on Medicaid to purchase a private plan with federal financial assistance.
And with these much needed, long-term reforms to strengthen the safety net for our neediest citizens, the Obamacare repeal and replace plan would significantly reduce the federal deficit. So it would be good for the federal government, it’ll cost you less money by a lot, and it will be a much better plan. You can’t do better than that.
When I ran for President, I made a commitment to the American people to repeal and replace Obamacare.
I am pleased to report that we are very, very close to ending this healthcare nightmare – we are so close.
The legislation working its way through Congress provides the choice and control people want, the affordability they need, and the quality they deserve in healthcare.
It’s a common sense approach that restores the sacred doctor-patient relationship. And you are going to finally have great healthcare at a lower price.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
My fellow Americans, 
Here at the White House, we are dedicating the month of July to three of our favorite words – MADE IN AMERICA. For more than two centuries, those three beautiful words have been the world standard for quality, craftsmanship and excellence – and they still are today.
As President, one of my highest priorities is to restore American Manufacturing.  For decades, American jobs have been ripped out of our communities, industries and towns have been stripped bare, and the entire communities have been uprooted and left.  Foreign nations got rich at America’s expense – and many special interests profited from this great global theft of American wealth.
Since taking the oath of office, our government has adopted a new philosophy: AMERICA FIRST – and believe me, it’s about time.  The era of economic surrender is over – and a new national pride is sweeping across our land. You see it, I see it, we all see it.
Industry confidence has soared to the highest level ever recorded. 
One of my first acts was ordering all federal agencies to enforce two simple rules: Buy American, and Hire American. We want to build with American Workers, and with American Iron, Aluminum and Steel. 
We are also tearing down every possible barrier to domestic energy production to unleash the full power of our economy. The American people will finally be allowed to tap into the vast energy wealth sitting right beneath our feet or right below our shores.
We have also sent a clear message to the world that we will not allow other nations to take advantage of us any longer.
That’s why I withdrew from the one-sided Paris Climate Accord – and believe me, it was one-sided. Not a good deal for our country. And the job-killing Trans Pacific Partnership, and that’s why we are pursuing a total renegotiation of NAFTA and if we don’t get it, we will terminate – that is end NAFTA forever.
Every other nation on earth protects its own interests. America is finally going to do the same. 
And as we continue to fight for American workers and industry, it won’t be long before we see the Made in America label proudly displayed on thousands of new products all across this great land and exported all around the world.  
Thank you, God bless you, God bless America. We are all doing a job, we are working very hard. It will be America First. It will be Make America Great Again. It’s happening.
My fellow Americans,
This week, I was joined at the White House by American families whose loved ones were killed by illegal immigrants.
Many of these illegal immigrants had extensive criminal records and had been repeatedly deported.
Every single one of these deaths was preventable.
These beautiful American lives were stolen because our government refused to do its job.  If the government had simply enforced our immigration laws, these Americans would still be alive today.
That is why, since the day I took the oath of office, I have been restoring the enforcement of our immigration laws and the protection and defense of our borders.
These courageous Americans joined me at the White House to call on Congress to pass two bills that I campaigned on during the election.  If enacted, these bills will save countless Americans lives.  The first bill, Kate’s Law, is named for Kate Steinle, who was killed by an illegal immigrant who had been deported five times.  This law will enhance criminal penalties for those who repeatedly re-enter our country illegally.
The second bill, the No Sanctuary For Criminals Act, will block federal grants to jurisdictions that shield dangerous criminal aliens from being turned over to federal law enforcement.
On Thursday, I am glad to report, these two bills passed the House of Representatives.  This represents a crucial step toward ensuring our public safety and national security.
I want to thank Judiciary Chairman Bob Goodlatte for his dedicated work on these critical bills, as well as other crucial legislation that will soon be considered as well.  I also thank Leadership for advancing these life-saving measures.
I now call on the Senate to take up these bills and send them back to my desk for signature – as soon as possible.  We need security.  We need safety in our country.  And I call on members of both parties to stand united with victims to stop these terrible and senseless crimes from ever happening in the first place.
This legislation presents a simple choice: either vote to save and protect American lives, or vote to shield and comfort criminal aliens who threaten innocent lives – and they’ve been shielded too long.
As we head towards the Fourth of July, we remember now more than ever to cherish our freedom.  The foundation of freedom is the rule of law.  It forms the bedrock of our Constitution and the cornerstone of our way of life.
So this Independence Day, while we're enjoying treasured time with our friends and loved ones, let us not forget the families who have an empty seat at the table this year.
And let us pledge that from now on, we will protect, defend and save American lives.
Thank you.
My fellow Americans,
Millions of families across our nation are suffering under the disaster known as Obamacare.  Traveling throughout our country over the last two years, I have met so many of these wonderful Americans, and I have never forgotten their stories.
In Wisconsin, I recently met a proud Veteran and his wife – Michael and Tammy Kushman. When they were forced onto Obamacare and the exchange in 2015, they thought they would be able to keep their doctor-but they couldn't.  They thought they would be able to keep their plan – but they weren't allowed.  They were told their premiums would go down – but instead, they soared by 120 percent upward.  It was one Obamacare lie after another.  Today, the Kushmans spend $1,400 dollars a month on health insurance – nearly one-fourth of their entire net monthly income.
On the same visit, I met another family, Robert and Sarah Stoll. Robert is a volunteer captain for his local fire department.  After their Obamacare premiums nearly doubled, they needed extra money and Sarah had no choice but to leave retirement to pay their bills.  But this new income meant they were no longer eligible for the tax credit they had once received, and the federal government actually forced them to repay thousands and thousands of dollars.
These families and so many others are victims of a catastrophic law that is wreaking havoc on our healthcare system and our families.
Democrats in Congress created this calamity and now, if we don't act, millions more Americans will be hurt by Obamacare's deepening death spiral.
Americans were promised lower premiums, more choices, and better access.  Instead, premiums have doubled nationwide – and insurers are still fleeing the market that Obamacare has nearly destroyed.  Americans in nearly one-third of all counties have only one insurer to choose from on the exchanges – and many markets may soon have no insurers at all.  It really is a disaster.
The American people are calling out for relief, and my administration is determined to provide it – and we are working with Congress to get a bill to my desk so we can rescue Americans from this catastrophe.
As families across the nation continue to suffer under this law, I only hope that Democrats in Congress will have the political courage to help fix what we know to be a catastrophic situation – a total disaster – that they have created.  To be part of the solution, instead of obstructing – always obstructing – change, blocking reform, and doubling-down on Obamacare's failure.
But no matter what, my Administration will never stop fighting for you – and for the healthcare system that you deserve.  We’ll get it done.  Even if we don’t have any help from the Democrats, we’ll get it done.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.
My fellow Americans, 
 
This week, our nation was shocked and horrified when a gunman opened fire on a Member of Congress.  Five people were wounded in the assault, including a member of House Leadership – my good friend, Steve Scalise.
 
Steve is beloved across Washington, he embodies everything public service is about – he’s dedicated to his constituents, devoted to his values, and deeply committed to his country.  I visited Steve, his wife, and his family in the hospital as he continues to fight for his recovery.  435 Members of Congress, and 300 million Americans, are pulling for him, praying for him, and pledging to him our full and total support.
 
We continue to hold all of those wounded and fighting for recovery in our hearts and prayers, including Matt Mika, who was also badly wounded.
 
In that terrible crime, we also witnessed the incredible heroism of Capitol Police.  Special Agent Crystal Griner – who I also had the honor of meeting during my visit to the Hospital – raced into gunfire, along with Special Agent David Bailey.  They saved the lives of our Members of Congress and prevented that dark day from becoming a tragedy beyond imagination.  They, like so many other courageous police officers, represent the very best of us. We salute them, and we also salute members of Alexandria Police, Fire and Rescue.
 
Though we have our differences, what unites us is so much stronger: our love of country, our devotion to its people.  Now more than ever, these values must guide us – and bring us closer together.  Let us always remember that our job is to serve and represent the whole American People – and that we are all children of the same God.
 
This week, my Administration continues our focus on providing economic opportunity for all.
 
On Thursday, I signed an Executive Order to launch a groundbreaking new Apprenticeship Initiative that will help young Americans learn the skills they need to find a rewarding career, earn a great living, and support themselves and their families.
 
We are celebrating the dignity of work and the greatness of the American Worker.
 
American citizens have worked every job, every occupation, no matter what it might be – no matter how grueling, how challenging, or even how dangerous.  They wash the windows on our tallest skyscrapers; they create works of art from burning fire and molten steel; they mine the earth and dive the ocean depths to bring energy into our cities and towns; they care for the sick, the elderly, and the wounded; and they lay the bricks, mortar, rebar, and concrete that give us places to live, to work, and to thrive.
 
Today, this is the message I want every young American to hear: there is dignity in every honest job, and there is nobility in every honest worker.  
 
Our Apprenticeship Initiative will make it dramatically easier for employers, industry groups and unions to create exciting new apprenticeship programs that place students into high-paying careers.
 
Instead of being racked with crushing student debt, those who participate will earn while they learn – think of that: earn while they learn.
 
Under our plan, young Americans will have a pathway to exciting and fulfilling careers.  They will become brilliant technicians who revitalize American manufacturing.  They will become welders who forge from fire amazing works of iron and steel and art.  And they will become entrepreneurs who revolutionize entire industries.  And these striving American citizens, including millions of talented young American women with tremendous potential, will become the programmers who change the world with the next great technological advance.
 
Every American deserves a path to a great job that they truly love. That begins with the right education – one that gives students the foundation for a lifetime of success. 
 
Every day, as your President, I will be committed to this goal.
 
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.